PEP 676: Refine formatting, spelling and syntax, and copyedit text (#2200)
python/peps: pep-0676.rst

Created: 01-Nov-2021
Post-History: 23-Sep-2021

> 

Author: I'm not sure I've seen _any_ recent PEP use 2 spaces after periods, and that convention is very uncommon in in general these days (much more so than when PEP 9/PEP 12 was written) so maybe PEP 12 should be updated on that point—I can open an issue after I finish my PR updating the references/footnotes wording. But as for two blank lines before headings, I find that as more of a readability issue, not just a style one, as I find it much easier to clearly distinguish section breaks, and see that convention or a similar one much more frequently in Markdown and reST elsewhere.

That said, I don't feel strongly about it and don't want to override your preference as the PEP author, though I'd rather hear from @JelleZijlstra or another PEP editor before going back through and redoing it.

Abstract
========

This PEP addresses the infrastructure around rendering PEP files from

> `reStructuredText`_ files to HTML web pages. We aim to specify a self-contained

Reviewer: I'd probably stick with "webpage", over time words in English tend to become joined with use, and this is happening with "web page" -> "webpage".

See https://english.stackexchange.com/a/540931/9001 and https://books.google.com/ngrams/graph?content=web+page%2Cweb+pages%2Cwebpage%2Cwebpages&year_start=1980&year_end=2019&corpus=26&smoothing=3 for an updated chart:

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/1324225/146676120-0d3ec303-7fd3-41f6-b671-9f82ec60e09e.png)

(There's currently 3 vs. 3 of each in PEPs, so no precedent here.)

```suggestion
`reStructuredText`_ files to HTML webpages. We aim to specify a self-contained
```

Author: Yeah, makes sense. May as well go with the more modern usage; I almost didn't change it (and should have thought better of it).

and maintainable solution for PEP readers, authors, and editors.

Motivation
==========

As of November 2021, Python Enhancement Proposals (PEPs) are rendered in a

> multi-system, multi-stage process. A Continuous Integration (CI) task runs a

Reviewer: I'd also keep this lowercase, it's a common noun not a proper noun.

```suggestion
multi-system, multi-stage process. A continuous integration (CI) task runs a
```

Author: Yeah; the reason I titlecased it in this instance was due to the initialism definition, but I don't see other sources doing that so yeah, you're right.

`docutils`_ script to render all PEP files individually. The CI task then

> uploads a TAR to a server, where it is retrieved and rendered into the

Reviewer: I'd also keep this as "tar archive".

The word "tar" is commonly written in lowercase: https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tar_(computing)

(It's originally from "<b>t</b>ape <b>ar</b>chive, so not strictly an initialism.)

So archive in "tar archive" is kind of redundant, but it's very common to write "tar archive" and I feel it's clearer, and, well, we're not dealing with tapes.

```suggestion
uploads a tar archive to a server, where it is retrieved and rendered into the
```

Author: You're correct on the lowercase, of course (its an extension and a CLI program, not an acronym, and at least as I've always pronounced it, its an acronym, not an initialism), and as much as the redundancy irks me, I can see the clarity benefit (for which reason I almost backed out the change originally), and I'm firmly in the camp that clarity trumps aesthetics, purity and other considerations if they are in conflict and cannot be resolved through other means.

Author: Pedantic side note @hugovk — have I been pronouncing tar (the archive) wrong all this time? As an acronym in the strict sense of pronunciation ("tar", one word) rather than an initialism ("t-a-r", single letters)?

On a related side-side note, when I was younger I used to insist on pronouncing my name as an initialism ("C-A-M") rather than an acronym ("Cam"), since they _were_ technically my first three initials after all, but everyone called me "CAM" anyway, so I eventually just embraced it.

Reviewer: I have only heard and say "tar" as one word, but who knows!

"CAM" instead of "C-A-M": people say "NASA" rather than "N-A-S-A" :)

Author: > I have only heard and say "tar" as one word, but who knows!

Yeah, that's all I've heard too haha; my (pedantic) comment was based on your reference to it as an initialism rather than an acronym, heh.

> "CAM" instead of "C-A-M": people say "NASA" rather than "N-A-S-A" :)

And I should know, since I work there :)

Reviewer 2: @CAM-Gerlach  -- I've been addressing you as Chris / Christopher per your logo-name thing -- would you prefer Cam?
A

Author: Yeah, sure :) While "CAM" is in the center of my logo-name thing, you're not the first person to look at it closely and see the "Christopher" instead, heh

would:

* reduce the amount of distributed configuration for supporting PEPs

> * enable quality-of-life improvements for those who read, write and review PEPs

Author: ```suggestion
* enable quality-of-life improvements for those who read, write and review PEPs
```

I only measure it as 79, like a number of other lines, unless you could the newline (which I thought didn't count?) But maybe I'm mistaken.

* solve a number of outstanding issues, and lay the path for improvements
* save volunteer maintainers' time

> We propose that PEPs are accessed through ``peps.python.org`` at the top-level
> namespace (for example, ``peps.python.org/pep-0008/``), and that all custom

Reviewer: Let's keep these as real links because (fingers crossed!) one day this PEP will implemented and future PEP readers can click the real links to see the output.

```suggestion
We propose that PEPs are accessed through `peps.python.org/pep-0008/`_ at the top-level
namespace (for example, `peps.python.org/pep-0008/`_), and that all custom
```

Author: I didn't like the specter of deliberately broken links and figured they would make sense as verbatim literals instead, but fair enough. I'll need to revert the removals in the references list too.

> tooling to support rendering PEPs is hosted in the `python/peps`_ repository.

Author: I actually dropped the trailing forward slash to—in the spirit of the PEP's strong lack of specificity elsewhere in seemingly more important areas, such as not even mentioning the name of the new build backend (Sphinx)—abstract away what I saw as an implementation detail. But I defer to your judgement on that.

I can understand the stylistic choice of not putting explicit backticks around single-word references, so long as its consistently, but what originally prompted this change was the fact that you do put backticks around `` `python.org`_ ``, but don't put them around `` peps.python.org_``, which doesn't ,seem to make any sense. At the very least, they should be used around both, or neither.

* support for SVG images [3]_
* typographic quotation marks [4]_
* additional footer information [5]_

> * Intersphinx functionality [6]_

Author: Fair enough

These are "easy wins" from this proposal, and would serve to improve the
quality-of-life for consumers of PEPs (including reviewers and writers). For

> example, the new reference implementation no longer requires a scheduled render

Author: It may technically be redundant so long as the reader carefully reads the rest of the sentence ("no longer requires"), but I'd argue it adds a bit of clarity. However, examining it in context, it isn't so much as I thought.

> example, the new reference implementation no longer requires a scheduled render

Author: It may technically be redundant so long as the reader carefully reads the rest of the sentence ("no longer requires"), but I'd argue it adds a bit of clarity. However, examining it in context, it isn't so much as I thought.

process to run, instead initiating rendering on every commit to the
`python/peps`_ repository.

Equally, there are a number of broken items currently; for example, list styles
are not respected, and support for updating images is challenging with the
current system [7]_. These are solved by the reference implementation of

> this proposal.

Author: I like the simplification. However:

* It doesn't make much sense to use, and many style guides explicitly prohibit, an unordered list for only two items (three is typically the minimum), without strong justification. It would be ideal to add a third item if you have one, but otherwise the listification would best be reverted.

* Furthermore, both items in the list reference the same footnote, which is redundant and doesn't really make sense, so that should either go next to "several small issues", or perhaps better, convert the footnote to individual direct inline links.

* Finally, some of the wording changes that were avoided were important to avoid unnecessarily minimizing and trivializing the fixes, making a more compelling case for the PEP. If you don't like the particular words chosen, I can certainly suggest others that would still avoid this issue.

> this proposal.

Reviewer: Hmm,

* I think two bullet points are just fine, especially if it helps lay out the information more clearly and improves readability (people don't read screens, they scan) 

* I'd be interested to see what style guides prohibit two, the [first I found](https://www.stylemanual.gov.au/structuring-content/lists) talking about bullet points has several with just two! And [Google's style guide](https://developers.google.com/style/lists) is usually well thought out, they also use and don't prohibit two.

> Third-party providers such as `Read the Docs`_ can additionally enhance this

Author: The reason for tweaking the diction was because the important thing about the providers weren't that they were commercial (paid services), but that they were third party (i.e. using standard Sphinx interoperates with other non-bespoke services).

> experience; for example, by providing rendered previews of changes in pull

Author: Without it, it's a comma splice, which is a grammar error. Adding two commas instead results in ambiguous syntax. However, if you want to avoid the semicolon, you could restructure it a bit like this:

```suggestion
experience by providing, for example, rendered previews of changes in pull
```

requests.

Specification
=============

> 

Author: They are widely used in the specification section of other PEPs, and I've never seen it explicitly noted like this. Perhaps it would be a better idea, if this is desired, to do so in PEP 1 or PEP 12 instead, instead of redundantly including this note in every PEP.

The proposed specification for rendering the PEP files to HTML is as per the
`reference implementation`_.

> The HTML files SHOULD be made available under the ``peps.python.org`` domain.

Reviewer: Linkable, as before.
```suggestion
The HTML files SHOULD be made available under the ``peps.python.org_ domain.
```

The rendered output SHOULD be hosted as static files, and MAY be behind a
content delivery network (CDN).

> The following redirect rules MUST be created from the `python.org`_ domain:

Reviewer: "for the"?

```suggestion
The following redirect rules MUST be created for the `python.org`_ domain:
```

Author: You're right; the redirects _themselves_ are "from" but the redirect _rules_ are "for".

Reviewer 2: I thought my review comment would append to this conversation, sorry! For context it was:

> No strong feelings, I supose I'd argue the redirect rules are being created *from* python.org to peps.python.org, although the purpose is *for* peps.python.org to work.

> The following redirect rules MUST be created for the `python.org`_ domain:

Author: It originally had "from" and I hadn't changed it, but @hugovk made the point that what was being described being "created" are the redirect _rules_, which are _for_ the python.org domain, while the redirects themselves are _from_ that domain _to_ peps.python.org

> The following redirect rules MUST be created for the `python.org`_ domain:

Reviewer: Ah, I see. Both are fine then, depending on how you read it :)

I was reading it like instructions for the `python.org` administrator who must make rules for that domain. No strong objection either way, it's probably clear enough either way.

* ``/peps/``            -> https://peps.python.org/
* ``/dev/peps/``        -> https://peps.python.org/
* ``/peps/(.*)\.html``  -> https://peps.python.org/$1
* ``/dev/peps/(.*)``    -> https://peps.python.org/$1

> The following Nginx configuration would achieve this:

Author: I'd seen NGINX, nginx, Nginx and NginX in various official and important third-party sources, but sure let's revert to `nginx`.

        return 308 https://peps.python.org/;
    }

Redirects MUST be implemented to preserve `URL fragments`_ for backward
compatibility purposes.

Backwards Compatibility
=======================

Due to server-side redirects to new canonical URLs, links in previously
published materials referring to the old URL scheme will be guaranteed to work.
Furthermore, aside from the resolved bugs and new implemented features, all
existing PEPs will still render as they did before with the new backend.
Therefore, this poses no major backwards compatibility concerns.

Security Implications
=====================

The main `python.org`_ website will no longer need to process raw HTML
uploads, closing a potential threat vector, and the PEP building and
deployment process will use modern, well maintained code and secure

> automated platforms, reducing likely potential attack surface. Therefore,

Reviewer: ```suggestion
automated platforms, reducing the likely potential attack surface. Therefore,
```

Author: Yup, editing error

        return 308 https://peps.python.org/;
    }

Redirects MUST be implemented to preserve `URL fragments`_ for backward

> compatibility purposes.

Author: Thank my spellchecker...

Backwards Compatibility
=======================

> Due to server-side redirects to new canonical URLs, links in previously
> published materials referring to the old URL scheme will be guaranteed to work.
> Furthermore, aside from the resolved bugs and new implemented features, all
> existing PEPs will still render as they did before with the new backend.
> Therefore, this poses no major backwards compatibility concerns.

Reviewer 2: > will still render as they did before with the new backend

You can argue this both ways (the outputted HTML is different, but the words are the same). I'm not sure it adds anything, I guess.

```suggestion
Due to server-side redirects to new canonical URLs, links in previously
published materials referring to old URL schemes will be guaranteed to work.
We have not identified any other backwards compatibility concerns.
```

Author: While I understand my original wording wasn't the best, I have to disagree with your dismissal of its importance overall. As a reader and reviewer of the PEP, my biggest backward compat concern aside from the URL change would be whether it causes any major rendering regressions in displaying previously valid syntax/formatting used in existing PEPs. Therefore, I certainly wouldn't dismiss this entirely as a backward compat concern. While those of us involved are well aware it doesn't, making this explicit helps ensure this is clear to everyone. What about (also fixed a missing definite article):

```suggestion
Due to server-side redirects to the new canonical URLs, links in previously
published materials referring to the old URL scheme will be guaranteed to work.
Furthermore, while the theme and presentation may differ, all existing PEPs
will still render correctly as they did before with the new backend.
Therefore, this poses no major backwards compatibility concerns.
```

Security Implications
=====================

> The main `python.org`_ website will no longer need to process raw HTML
> uploads, closing a potential threat vector, and the PEP building and
> deployment process will use modern, well maintained code and secure
> automated platforms, reducing the likely potential attack surface. Therefore,
> there is no forseen negative security impact.

Author: ```suggestion
The main `python.org`_ website will no longer process raw HTML uploads, 
closing a potential threat vector. PEP rendering and deployment processes will
use modern, well-maintained code and secure automated platforms, further 
reducing the potential attack surface. Therefore, we see no negative security
impact.
```

Took what you have, with one tweak to my writing (add a missing hyphen) and two tweaks to yours: add a missing comma (required) and sequence modern before well-maintained for better flow and balance (optional, comes down to judgement); and add "Therefore" to more explicitly connect the logic and improve the choppy flow due to three consecutive disconnected sentences.

How to Teach This
=================

The new canonical URLs will be publicised in the documentation. However, this
is mainly a backend infrastructure change, and there should be minimal

> end-user impact. PEP 1 and PEP 12 will be updated as needed to include and
> document any relevant new roles, directive, syntax and other constructs enabled
> by this change.

Author: This is why I put "as needed", but what about making this more generic instead and cut out the rest, i.e.

```suggestion
end-user impact. PEP 1 and PEP 12 will be updated as needed.
```

Reference Implementation
========================

The proposed implementation has been merged into the `python/peps`_ repository

> in a series of pull requests [8]_. It currently automatically renders all

Author: I can see the issue with `currently`, but the issue here is it is not clear if the implementation is merely _capable_ of automatically rendering all PEPs, or is actually already actively in use doing (which makes a stronger argument in this PEP's favor). What about "already" instead?

```suggestion
in a series of pull requests [8]_. This already automatically renders all
```

Or what about this, which would be cleaner but I'd need to apply it manually since its over the line length limit:

```suggestion
in a series of pull requests [8]_. It is already used to automatically render all
```

PEPs on every commit.

Rejected Ideas
==============

It would likely be possible to amend the current docutils-based manual
rendering process to include many of the quality-of-life improvements and

> bug mitigations mentioned above. However, we do not believe that this would

Author: I can certainly understand the "manual" argument. However, "a lot" is not appropriate diction in formal nor technical writing such as this, and while it is technically correct that Sphinx extends docutils, this line does not contradict that, the existing version of the PEP already refers to the process being a "docutils script", and it is fairly clear what is meant. `setuptools` extends `distutils`, but if you were referring to upgrading a `distutils`-based built script to use `setuptools`, I don't think the meaning would be unclear. But, on the other hand, it is not absolutely critical for clarity.

solve the distributed tooling issue.

It would be possible to use the output from the proposed rendering system and
import it into the existing `python.org`_ domain. We would argue, however,
that this would be the worst of both worlds, as a great deal of complexity

> is added, while none is removed.

Author: Commas are syntactically needed there, not a just stylistic preference. However, your proposed edit acceptably side-steps the problem without requiring them.

Open Issues
===========

None.

> Acknowledgments

Author: Sorry, my spellchecker flagged it (I may have worked as a copyeditor, but I've always relied mostly on automated tools for spelling) and I didn't realize UK English had a different spelling here (which I'd respected elsewhere)

===============

> Thanks to Hugo van Kemenade, Pablo Galindo Salgado and Éric Araujo for
> supporting this effort since April 2020.

Author: In its previous usage, "for support" is an unambiguous grammar error. At the very minimum it needs a definite article, like this:

```suggestion
Thanks to Hugo van Kemenade, Pablo Galindo Salgado, and Éric Araujo for the
support since April 2020.
```

and I tweaked it further to avoid the awkward and mildly ambiguous phrasing, but its not _wrong_ without that, per say. If you'd prefer a more conservative but still correct change, the above would suffice.

Footnotes
=========

.. _documentation: https://pythondotorg.readthedocs.io/pep_generation.html
.. _docutils: https://docutils.sourceforge.io
.. _Makefile: https://www.gnu.org/software/make/manual/make.html#Introduction
.. _python.org: https://www.python.org
.. _peps.python.org: https://peps.python.org/

> .. _peps.python.org/pep-0008: https://peps.python.org/pep-0008/

Author: I was sorting logically (domain -> subdomain -> url) rather than lexigraphically here, but its fine if you want to keep that, of course—I auto-lexigraphically-sorted the references section in my PEP 639, albeit that one was over 100 entries long.
